all right welcome to the Ravid show we are here at small data SF and look who
I have with me Wes McKinney I'm so happy to have you on the Ravid show it's
finally you know years of following you your content that obviously we've done
so much for the community out there so excited to have you in the Ravid show
obviously I'm excited to chat about small data I'm excited to chat about
Posit you'd be you know co-founded Voltron data you obviously created
co-created Pandas Apache Arrow now and many more projects that you work on so
I'm excited to chat with you today yeah thanks for thanks for having me awesome
just for you know since we are you're at small data I'm kind of curious to know
what body you you're in why are you interested in this topic of small data
well I started out building building tools for for small data to make working
with with small data sets that fit in fit in memory work on work on your
laptop work on your desktop make right that easier right so when I when I got
out of school and and found myself doing some data analysis in Excel and with
sequel and with our I really felt the desire to make the tools there's a lot
better to make people more productive and I found that I really enjoy building
tools designing tools for humans to use not only making systems more efficient
more more scalable but also making the code easier to write to make make the
whole process for the people in the loop more pleasant yeah that's awesome and
thanks for sharing those insights because it kind of also you know
obviously this conference validates a lot of things for me as well in terms of
me talking like I go out and talk to a few enterprise leaders out there and you
know it's always a thing that they kind of have is like oh we work on big data
projects but then there's obviously a lot of room for smaller projects that we
want to work on and this could be the start of it is that the same that what
are you I mean it I think what's interesting is that what what was once
big data is not is not big data anymore so people used to think about 100
gigabytes is big data or a terabyte is big data but that data fits on fits on
your laptop now and we've got right you know the semiconductor industry has has
succeeded in hacking a lot of very powerful processor cores you know even
on mobile phones and exactly and laptops and this disk speed has gotten really
really fast and at the same time there's been a lot of engineering work to build
these high-performance execution engines like duck DB that can be used that can
be used anywhere that can run on your laptop and so the kinds of capabilities
that we have that can run locally and you're right right on your laptop or on
your mobile phone is really is really impressive and it far exceeds anything
that we had 10 years ago or 15 years ago and so what was once thought about as
big data is no longer big data and so that's partly what we mean when we say
we say small data or making small data making small data cool again right
because the reality is that a lot of a lot of business workflows don't actually
you might have big data the way we like to say is that big data is what happens
when you collect a lot of small data over time in a business you know
collecting sales data or mobile phone you know analytics from from users and
web applications and mobile applications and things like that but a lot of
business analytics you know over there's been studies that have shown that more
than 99% of business analytics workloads only end up touching a small fraction of
the total the total data set and so I think the idea is that we want to build
tools that can operate efficiently at that scale of course to have the the
option to use an actual big data system when you need to operate on the full
data set right but yeah it's it's a yeah there's no sense in kind of using kind
of the heavy artillery for these problems that you know hundred gigabytes
and on down is what I would qualify as the small data where there's no sense
in using a distributed system or running right running spark or something that
where you need to spin up a cluster when you can do it on you know you can rent a
single node in AWS that has 24 terabytes of memory and so if your data fits in
memory then it's not big data anymore just keep it easy and just keep it you
know less complex kind of makes it easier for the enterprise leaders out
there as well so thanks for sharing that I'm kind of also curious to know
obviously I just saw your talk about retooling for a small or data era what
does this mean and you know first of all I love to talk but then kind of excited
you know curious to know a little about that yeah so what I mean by retooling is
that over the last over the last 10 years I think there was a realization in
the mid in the mid 2010s that we needed to rethink many of the many of the
different layers of the data stack not only the user interfaces but the middle
layers the the execution engines the query optimization the storage layers to
make everything a great deal simpler and more and more efficient and so my talk
was about the open standards and protocols that we've been developing to
to modularize and standardize those different layers of the stack yep to
make things more interoperable more inefficient as well as making the
individuals people writing code a great deal more efficient so the idea is that
in thinking about the smaller data era is that we think that in the future now
not only now but also in the future the most work can take place on a single
node so we need to optimize around that single node development experience to
make right really really productive and able to to prototype and work at that
at that small scale but then whenever they do need to scale scale out or maybe
they 99% of the time they're working on a single node either in the cloud or on
on their their desktop or their laptop but when they do actually encounter big
data that it's not a great hardship where you have to say oh we need to use
a totally different system to work with this data but actually we can say okay
here's my code I've developed it for small scale but I need to run that at
large scale but that we have a the ability to generate a configuration from
that users code without having to rewrite the code you can operate on at
large scale on a distributed cluster I love it I that kind of also brings me to
another interesting question is about the challenges right what do you see in
terms of the challenges when it's about the big data now and now you've been
you're talking about the small data what's like the equation there I think
it really comes down to you know use a user experience right question where I
think we want to bring the small I think small data is not just about the data
size but it's also about the the mindset that when we think about small
data we also think about immediacy we think about speed we think about
interactivity and so we want to design our user user interfaces and our tools
around that that interactivity that fast fast feedback cycle rapid feedback
interactivity responsiveness low latency interactions yeah and so so there's
there's a bunch of projects happening there's a new project called mosaic
which is a duck TV powered data visualization cross filtering framework
out of right out of the University of Washington and CMU it's really about
like how do we build a framework that enables us to build these low latency
interactive data dashboards where we can attach to you know maybe it's maybe it's
a small data set but it might not be but that you know all that is in the
background and we can think about how do we build this this highly interactive
responsive data application where we can get answers to our questions really
really fast and the users don't have to think about the infrastructure right and
like how to deploy this and how to run it and so I think that that small data
mindset really helps inform us our kind of our user user experience design
yes I love it and thanks for sharing that kind of also curious to learn a
little about what is a patch arrow I know you that's the that's the project
that you're working on I'm pretty sure the audience would be curious to learn
a little about that as well and I know the projects that you've done have
massively been adopted by such a large community so looking forward learning
about this arrow is so Apache arrow is not it's not a project that gets used by
by a lot of end-user data scientists and data engineers but it's one of those
open standards and protocols that I was talking about where it provides this
high-bandwidth high-performance data connectivity layer we recognize that in
order to build next-generation more efficient systems that we needed to be
able to transport large quantities of data from system to system at very high
bandwidth across networks and from storage and into memory and we need that
we need that data format to also be very efficient for query processing for
actually executing and processing data so we developed we started developing
arrow in in the mid 2010s in 2015 2016 it's now almost a nine-year-old project
we've been developing it there's arrow libraries for all kinds of all kinds of
programming languages and different different types of systems but it is
really served as one of the the new pieces of connectivity fabric that has
enabled these kind of next-generation accelerated accelerated systems that are
built for to power us for the next 20 years nice definitely looking forward to
it one more question around small data do you think this is like the next big
thing well like I said it's it's it's it's a mindset and I think that machines
are going to continue to get more you know larger more powerful processor core
accounts I'm going to continue to go up as well as I think we'll eventually see
specialized computing hardware that just does serves analytics and does
analytical data processing and so I think you know like I said getting
people in that small data mindset of building design of thinking about user
experience building for user productivity building for the local
local development experience or hybrid having some processing local some cloud
like the mother duck model yeah I think that makes I think that makes a lot of
sense but the reality is that there still is big data and we but the goal is
to be able to leverage truly scale out distributed big data systems without
having to rewrite your code and so some recently you know last several years
we've been put a lot of emphasis on a Python project called IBIS which nice
basically is a portable data frame API that's aiming to achieve that scale
independent computing for Python developers basically incorporating what
we learned from building pandas to create create something that is designed
for the local experience but whenever you need to point to a click house
database or a big query or spark sequel that you can you can go from working
locally with duck TV at a certain scale call it one terabyte and down on your
laptop to working at the hundred terabyte or the one petabyte scale yep
without having to rewrite your code okay that's fantastic I think I'm gonna
definitely share that with our audience as well like a link where people can
learn more about Apache or IBIS and other things as well I know the
conference is getting busier so one last question for us if people want to reach
out to you where can they do it if they can follow these projects which is the
best place yeah I mean you can follow me on follow me on Twitter X and LinkedIn
I'm president on on both of those platforms yeah sure how many people are
still on Twitter but I still read things there and you can send me you can send
me a direct message you know I'm at I'm at I'm at pause it now I'm involved with
the positron project it's a new data science ID I would encourage you to
follow along with that IBIS arrow and pandas of course are still projects that
I created or co-created and still have large communities around them so if
you're interested in you know getting involved with these communities they
are always in need of new developers and your feedback from from the user
standpoint is also very helpful so there's many ways for for you to get
involved and yeah I look forward to seeing everyone around that's awesome
and one last question for sure I promise is about the book yes well when is the
next edition coming people love it yeah they do so we came out with the third
edition of Python for data analysis in 2022 which was updated for pandas
2.0 yes and yeah I still I still keep it up to date and right now you know we're
in a bit of a transitional period there's Polars which is a new data frame
library exactly on and so people have asked me about having like a Polars
version of the book so I'm in a little bit of like a wait-and-see to kind of
conceive of like what will maybe the fourth edition of the book look like yes
and what what sort of new content that I might like to add but I think that you
know the topics that are treated in the book are really about learning skills
and learning how to think about working with data in Python and so I think it's
a lot of it's really evergreen content so even if people are using pandas less
and less in the future because they're using Polars or something else you can
still take the skills that you learn in the book and you can put them to work it
will make it that much easier to learn other tools in the ecosystem and become
productive I love it so definitely looking forward to it in thanks for
sharing all the details thanks for visiting the rabbit show and hope you
have a great conference ahead thank you thanks for having me thanks everyone